HR: Looking over the green fields and the peaceful atmosphere of this town. I'm looking at-- we're standing on the east side, on east bank of the Elbe River. You see a-- a riverboat, chugging along with its cargo, water running downstream, emptying, perhaps, at the North Sea. And looking at this peaceful town, one couldn't imagine that 50 years ago this place was a scene of again, man's greatest inhumanity towards men. I, as I've mentioned before, I will try to focus more or less on a day in April, the 9th of April, 1945. Schonebeck was an obscure name for me. It was a small outpost of the camp of Buchenwald, known in German as [GERMAN] Buchenwald. I came here, to the best of my recollection, in March, first part of March of 1945, from the-- as they call, the mother camp of Buchenwald. I actually volunteered to come to this camp. Because Buchenwald was such a dead camp. People were dying of starvation. [BACKGROUND NOISE] Cannibalism was pervasive, conditions were overcrowded. Buchenwald camp, in those days, housed over 200,000 prisoners, where it was built for perhaps 35,000 or 40,000. We slept in bunks five high. In bunks, actually, it was sort of like shelves, a warehouse of human bodies. And each bunk would house five human-- walking human skeletons. Any of us need to turn at night, all five of us would turn at the same time. I knew that I couldn't last very much longer there. [BACKGROUND NOISE] I heard-- saw an announcement in front of the barrack that they are seeking [GERMAN], which means professional people, people with trades, tradesmen. And that particular time they were looking for electricians. Of course, I was not an electrician. After-- after being-- this was-- Buchenwald was my sixth camp in succession. And I was 18, probably 18 and a 1/2 at the time. And I had never had the opportunity to even learn electric work. However, I was helping out my brother one time, who was taking electrical instructions. And he was showing me a certain tool-- I will never forget that-- called [GERMAN]. It's a-- it's a tool that looks like a-- like a large scissors, and one which is used to bend pipes. Well, one might wonder, why am I telling this story about a inconsequential tool? Well, that particular tool, perhaps, saved my life again. I-- volunteered. I stood in line and registered as a tradesman electrical-- electrical helper, a helper for-- for-- because one-- one couldn't be a master electrician. So I was a helper electrician. And this is, mind you, April of 1945, when the war is lost. Of course, I had no idea that the war was lost. Neither did most of my fellow inmates. The Germans, and they-- and they've-- true-- true-- true to their fashion, still went about the technicalities of their daily work. They-- I remember seeing a big table set up with various tools on the tables. And one had to identify a certain tool and step in the next line. I walked by and I saw those big scissors with the-- resembled of-- of gardens, garden shears. And i pointed to it. And I said, [GERMAN]. And the-- and the guard who-- who was watching me, shook his head and pointed to the right. So I stepped over to the right. And wouldn't you know, I was already with a group of electricians. I had no idea where they're sending us. But I knew this was a ticket out of Buchenwald. And it certainly was. But it was not a ticket into Club Med, if you will. It was a ticket out of Buchenwald, all right? They put us on-- on cattle trains again. And after riding perhaps a day, day and a half-- I can't recall-- we wound up in this place, Schonebeck. They unloaded us, put us into barracks again, in this camp of Schonebeck, which was started in 1942. As a-- as I later found out, they-- a few barracks attached to the Henkel-- no, I'm sorry, Junkers-- Junkers Factory. Junkers, the-- that's J-U-N-K-E-R-S, the famous fighter planes. And electricians, obviously, were needed to-- for that particular project. They put us into the camps, into the barracks after counting again and issuing new numbers and new stripes. First few days, to the best of my knowledge, we never saw any kind of technical work. So they took us out to dig ditches. The marshes I'm standing in were probably the places we were digging ditches. Of what for, I have no idea. As it turned out later, we were digging ditches for a resistance. The ditches were dug on a-- in a zigzag fashion. They were probably making a stand here to fight the oncoming Russians. And we were marching from here and back to the camp. The camp of Schonebeck, unfortunately, is-- fortunately rather-- is not in existence anymore. Because the few barracks which were attached to the factory were, since then, demolished. And new barracks were put in place. And some of the old barracks, still saved, I understand, which were converted into tractor factory parts. And also, some manufacturing of tractor factories. As I'm saying it, I'm reminded of-- of Prophet Isaiah's proverb of now that the war was over, they made tractors. So that I think I'm trying to make reference to the time will come where souls will be made into plows, and men shall not know war-- of war anymore, or something to that effect. I can't quote Isaiah bervatim-- verbatim, rather. However, this was the only thing that we ever did in this camp of Schonebeck, which is right behind me, on the west side of the-- of the Elbe River, which I should say, was behind me. And after working perhaps a week or two, I could see we not going to be used for any-- anything else except digging ditches and-- and cleaning up ruins after bombardment of-- of the British and American planes, which were hitting the factories rather hard. After some time, rumors were flying that the Allies landed in Europe, and the Russians are coming. But the rumors we-- we discounted rather quickly. Because we've heard rumors for the last five years at-- at that point. One day, unbeknown to us what was going to happen, they ask us to assemble in the appellplatz. They said, blow on your whistles. [GERMAN]. They were issuing rations for one day. Again, pieces of bread and a couple potatoes. And after counting us, they all said-- they said, forward march. We started marching out of the town of Schonebeck, which is right behind me. And to the best of my recollection, we came to the place where the beginning of-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] --at the-- at the apron of the bridge. Then we start marching across the bridge. I recall vividly some movement of the-- of army trucks, army technicians. And right below here, I saw green uniforms, and men in green uniforms, wiring and-- and moving about. I had no idea what's-- what's happening. They were stringing wires across and motioning us, [GERMAN], across the bridge. We, of course, walked at then-- what I thought a pretty brisk pace. But it wasn't fast enough for them. So we had to run. As we ran across the bridge, I was out of breath. And so they-- we stopped here because the guards were also out of breath. And it was that the guards in those days were old men. Because they drafted young ones to the front. So we came down here to this place, approximately. I remember the marshes being kind knee-- knee deep. And we rested under this bridge and start consuming our rations which was issued for the following day. And, of course, we-- the best way to-- to assure oneself of the safety of the ration of a piece of bread and a cup of potatoes was to consume it, eat it as fast as possible. And that way now you-- you couldn't lose it. And no one could steal it from you. And after about a half an hour or so, we assembled again and forward march. And we start marching towards the town, towards the next town. By that time, I, of course, not having a watch and not having a calendar, I-- I-- I did ask the one guard who was kind of friendly, old-- old guy. And I asked him, what day it is today? And he says, why do you want to know? And it was obvious to him that I had no appointments that day or anything else to do. So he says-- so he says-- so he says, why? You got something in mind? And I says, no I just want to know what day it  is today? So he says, [GERMAN]. And I said-- and I quickly recorded that mind-- in my mind. And I said to myself, if I-- if I live-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] If I survive tonight, if I live through it, I will remember the 9th of April. And if I don't, then of course, this was the day-- this was the day when I left this world. And the reason I asked for the date because I had made up my mind. I couldn't march any longer. That the next stop or then the second stop, perhaps, if the opportunity arises, I will run away. I will try to escape. Because this was my-- let's see. one, two, three-- this was my fifth march. And I knew what happened to stragglers. Once you were left at the end and you couldn't march anymore, they would shoot you. We-- It was a common sound to hear pock! Pock! Pock! As we were marching forward the sounds came from behind us. And I also remember the faces of the-- of the poor guys who couldn't march any longer. And they were reaching out for someone to drag them along. But, unfortunately, one-- if you drag someone along, you would probably be dragged into the-- into the stragglers' position and probably get shot yourself. But there were-- there were cases where-- when guys would help one another. As a matter of fact, I was helped by my two friends, too. But I couldn't march any  longer. And I made up my mind, this is the night I'm going to try to make a getaway. We came-- we packed up from here. Packed up, there was nothing to pack up. I picked up my little spoon, which I carried in my pocket and my little kit-- mess kit, which was a form like a little bowl, aluminum bowl. And we start marching again. I would like to describe the scene of the next time we came to-- [BACKGROUND NOISE] Soon. CREW: I'm just going to stick around with this [INAUDIBLE]. [BACKGROUND NOISE] [BACKGROUND NOISE]